Add EIP: Versioning Scheme for EIPs (#8034)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7577.md

---
eip: 7577
title: Versioning Scheme for EIPs
description: Use a versioning scheme for EIPs based on changes made to their Specification section.
author: danceratopz (@danceratopz), Ahmad Bitar (@smartprogrammer93)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-eip-versioning-scheme-for-eips/17295
status: Draft
type: Meta
created: 2023-12-13
---

## Abstract

> This EIP introduces a versioning scheme for [Standards Track](./eip-1.md#eip-types) EIPs by applying semantic versioning based on changes made to the EIP's Specification section once its status has changed from `Draft` to `Review`.

Reviewer: Might be a good idea to provide more in depth information about semantic versioning for people who aren't familiar. You could do something similar to: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5139#versioning

## Motivation

> EIP specifications often receive increasing modifications as more people review them, which is generally the case as client teams start implementing the specifications and the community gains a better understanding of their interaction with the rest of the protocol. These changes can be difficult to track. In particular, as EVM reference tests are often not maintained (and generally not released) by client teams or the EIP's authors, it can be difficult to ascertain whether a release of reference tests (for example from ethereum/tests or ethereum/execution-spec-tests) is sufficient, or even valid, to test the latest version of an EIP's specifications or the specification as currently implemented by a client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EIP specifications often receive increasing modifications as more people review them, which is generally the case as client teams start implementing the specifications and the community gains a better understanding of their interaction with the rest of the protocol. These changes can be difficult to track. In particular, as EVM reference tests are often not maintained (and generally not released) by client teams or the EIP's authors, it can be difficult to ascertain whether a release of reference tests is sufficient, or even valid, to test the latest version of an EIP's specifications or the specification as currently implemented by a client.
```

Avoid using external links.

This EIP proposes a semantic versioning scheme and an addition of a CHANGELOG section for EIPs that allows the community to easily track changes, their impact on current client and test implementations and maintain a clear history.

## Specification

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

```

Once an EIP has moved out of "Draft" status, it MUST use the EIP versioning scheme outlined below. It MAY already use the versioning scheme in "Draft" status, which could be useful if the specification is actively being implemented. If more than one team is implementing the specification, it is RECOMMENDED to change the EIP's status to "Review".

The EIP versioning scheme MUST follow a semantic versioning scheme of `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`, which is applied as follows:

1. `MAJOR`: A breaking change to the specifications that requires an implementation change and a change to the reference tests.
2. `MINOR`: An addition to the specifications that does not require changing an existing implementation, but requires additional implementation and additional test coverage to be added to the reference tests.
3. `PATCH`: Any cosmetic change to, or a reformulation of, the EIP without specification change.

Before the EIP has moved out of Draft status and is being versioned, the version number MUST initially have `MAJOR` version `0`.

> For every change made to an EIP via a PR made to ethereum/EIPs, the PR author MUST add a new entry to the CHANGELOG section of the EIP that outlines the changes made within the PR. This CHANGELOG entry MUST include the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every change made to an EIP, the pull request (PR) author MUST add a new entry to the CHANGELOG section of the EIP that outlines the changes made within the PR. This CHANGELOG entry MUST include the following:
```

Please expand abbreviations the first time they are used.

1. A new version number that follows the semantic versioning scheme outlined above.
2. The date when the changes where introduced.

> 3. A link to the ethereum/EIPs PR that implements the changes.

Reviewer: The current rules forbid links to PRs. This isn't a formatting issue, so you'll have to talk to EIP editors if you want this change.

Author: Removed link requirement in 2a0eb65dbddbeb299ad419b0cfc8fcef82dcc669.

I think a link to the changes would be helpful to readers - I'll follow up with EIP editors to gauge interest.

4. A line for each change made to the EIP's specifications that includes a short description of the change.

Additionally, the new version MUST be added to the metadata header of the EIP's markdown file (to a new "version" field), so that it may be easily parsed.

Tooling SHOULD be added to the ethereum/EIPs repository that checks that the CHANGELOG is updated and that the version number in the metadata header matches the latest version number in the CHANGELOG.

> EIPS that have dependencies on other EIPS SHOULD include the version of the dependency in the metadata "requires" field.

Reviewer: Please provide more information about how this would look. EIP should include enough detail to be implementable.

Author: 91e978f1c9ca9f186bad319969c1270bd3745eed:

* Removed the following requirement, as it's impractical to update all downstream EIPs upon a version change:

    > EIPS that have dependencies on other EIPS SHOULD include the version of the dependency in the metadata "requires" field.

* Modified the Specification with a suggestion for the mechanism to update an EIP version using repo tooling.

## Rationale

> A semantic versioning scheme enables clearer communication within the community about EIP status and allows the impact of a change to be ascertained at first glance.

Reviewer: This belongs in the Motivation section. 

The Motivation should be why is this proposal a good idea, where the Rationale should be why you made those specific decisions within the EIP.

Author: Removed from Rational in 0503e84968e12e8c4ead79f895272298b9d958d6.

> Making the version available in the EIP's metadata header additionally allows for programmatic parsing of the version number by tooling used in reference tests or by client teams. Currently, the ethereum/execution-spec-tests repository implements a rudimentary EIP version checker: EIP spec tests are required to declare the EIP's markdown file digest SHA that the test implementation was based on. The current value of the digest SHA is then polled via the Github API to verify that no changes have occurred since the test implementation. While this provides a warning to test implementers that the EIP has changed, it is clearly of limited use.

Reviewer: Please avoid external links (ethereum/execution-spec-tests).

Author: Removed in 92fb8ba7. The repository is still referred to, I hope that's ok?

A richer versioning scheme, as defined by this EIP, can provide a lot of value to the testing toolchain. Client teams can provide an interface that reports the EIP version currently implemented and reference tests can specify the version they implement in generated tests as metadata. This allows a test runner to mark tests to xfail (expectedly fail) and issue a warning if the `MAJOR` or `MINOR` versions don't match. It would even be possible to automatically select the correct version of the reference tests to run against a client implementation, although given the pace of Ethereum development, it will likely be impractical to maintain and track multiple versions of tests.

### Case Study

This section explores how the versioning scheme would be applied to an existing EIPs recently under active development at the time of writing as an example.

> The history of [EIP-4788](./eip-4788.md) contains many changes to its specification. EIP-4788 was updated to status "Review" on 2023-11-28 in #7992. This case study assumes, however, that the EIP moved to status "Review" as of #6859 and updated to version 1.0.0 due to the start of a client team implementation.

Reviewer: Avoid linking to pull requests.

```suggestion
The history of [EIP-4788](./eip-4788.md) contains many changes to its specification. EIP-4788 was updated to status "Review" on 2023-11-28. This case study assumes, however, that the EIP moved to status "Review" as of 2023-04-11 and updated to version 1.0.0 due to the start of a client team implementation.
```

---
eip: 7577
title: Versioning Scheme for EIPs
description: Use a versioning scheme for EIPs based on changes made to their Specification section.
author: danceratopz (@danceratopz), Ahmad Bitar (@smartprogrammer93)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-eip-versioning-scheme-for-eips/17295
status: Draft

> type: Meta

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this shall be `Informational` or `Meta`. I like the idea and direction. I don't think every EIP needs adopt it

1. `MAJOR`: A breaking change to the specifications that requires an implementation change and a change to the reference tests.
2. `MINOR`: An addition to the specifications that requires additional implementation and additional test coverage to be added to the reference tests.
3. `PATCH`: Any cosmetic change to, or a reformulation of, the EIP without specification change.

Before the EIP has moved out of Draft status and is being versioned, the version number MUST initially have `MAJOR` version `0`.

For every change made to an EIP via a pull request (PR) made to ethereum/EIPs, a new entry MUST be added to the CHANGELOG section of the EIP that outlines the changes made within the PR. This CHANGELOG entry MUST include the following:

1. A new version number that follows the semantic versioning scheme outlined above.
2. The date when the changes where introduced.
3. The ethereum/EIPs PR number that implements the changes.
4. A line for each change made to the EIP's specifications that includes a short description of the change.

> Additionally, the new version MUST be added to the metadata header of the EIP's markdown file (to a new "version" field), so that it may be easily parsed.

Reviewer 3: >to a new "version" field

This should have higher billing.  Like the first line after the RFCs.  As well as the new changelog section.

```
A new header field `version` is added to new EIPs, as defined below, identifying the  draft and/or review version of the specification.

A new body section "Changelog" is added to new EIPs, as defined below, tracking the changes between draft and/or review versions of the specificaiton.
```

Also, we should update the EIP template to add these two new feaures as part of this EIP when it goes final.
